Welcome my friend to
today's lecture on et.
C, f and l. CM Ever felt like
your brain needed a power up?
This is it.
Concept explanation.
Et CF my friend, or as some call it
GCD, that's greatest common device,
not some new government department.
Relax is basically the biggest number
that can neatly divide two or more
numbers without leaving any remainder.
Imagine you have 12 ludus and 18 bures.
You want to pack them into
the largest possible identical
boxes without cutting any suite.
The factors of 12 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12,
and for 18 they are 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18.
Now the common dividers
or factors are 1, 2, 3, 6.
The king among them, the highest one
is six, so et CF of 12 and 18 is six.
Simple, isn't it?
Now LCM my friend, is like the opposite
twin, the least common multiple.
It's the smallest positive number that
is a multiple of two or more numbers.
Think of it this way, you are
trying to meet up with a friend.
One friend comes every four
days, another every six days.
When will you both see them
together again at the earliest?
Multiples of four are 4, 8,
12, 16, 20, 24, and so on.
Multiples of six are 6,
12, 18, 24, and so on.
The common ones are 1224.
The earliest, or least among them
is 12, so LCM of four and six is 12.
It's like finding the
earliest Milah point.
You see, real world relevance.
Now, why on earth do we study this?
You ask because it's not just
for your exam, my friend.
It's got some real world fill me
Applications, especially in finance
and banking at CF and LCM, are
critical for optimizing resource
allocation and scheduling financial
operations effectively, ensuring smooth
and coordinated banking processes.
They help in finding common points or
dividing assets effectively, just like
how you'd manage your pocket money.
Let's look at some examples.
First, scheduling
payments or installments.
It's used to find the least common
interval for recurring payments,
deposits, or loan installments
across multiple accounts or clients.
Think of it as synchronizing your
EMIS so they don't all hit at
once and give you a heart attack.
Next up, resource optimization.
When multiple departments require shared
resources, HCF can help in dividing
these resources into the largest
possible equal units without waste.
It's like ensuring everyone gets
their fair share of chai, no fights.
Then we have financial cycle management.
This helps in determining the
smallest common period for different
financial cycles or reporting
periods to synchronize operations.
It's all about smooth sailing, my friend.
Also batch processing.
In transaction processing.
HCF and LCM can help optimize the size
of batches for efficiency, ensuring
all transactions are processed in
synchronized groups fast, fast processing.
You see, while a bit abstract investment
portfolio grouping concepts can apply
to grouping diverse investment assets
into the largest common denominations,
or finding the smallest common
timeframe for portfolio review.
Finally, data synchronization in
large banking systems, HCF and LCM
can conceptually aid in synchronizing
data updates from different sources at
the most efficient common intervals.
So no data confusion, everything
is stuck, stuck in sync.
Breakdown of question types.
Now let's talk about the question
paper card game, my friend, based
on past trends in your exam.
Here are the common question
types for HCF and LCM.
Approximately 30% of questions are
about simply finding HCF or LCM
of given numbers, which can even
include fractions or decimals.
Then roughly 25% are word problems
involving HVF, like finding
the largest possible size or
the maximum number of groups.
Another 25% are word problems involving
LCM, like figuring out when events
will coincide, or finding the smallest
number divisible by given numbers.
Problems based on the relationship between
HCF and LCM make up about 10% and a
smaller chunk around 5% involves problems
with numbers leaving specific remainders.
Finally, another 5% are application
problems like those infamous bells
ringing or traffic lights changing color.
So be ready for all these
flavors of questions.
Coso.
Formulas and trick.
All right, my friend time for some
jadu mantra formulas and tricks.
First and foremost, the B of All formulas,
the product of two numbers is equal
to the product of their HCF and LCM.
Simple logic, right?
If N one and N two are your two
numbers, then N one multiplied by N
two equals HCF of N one comma n two,
multiplied by LCM of N one comma n two.
Remember this, it's a golden rule.
For et CF of fractions, it's et CF of
numerator divided by LCM of denominators.
Sounds like Ulta.
Ulta, but it works.
And for LCM of fractions,
it's LCM of numerator divided
by et CF of denominators.
Just flip the script literally
for et CF of decimals.
Convert those point value numbers
to fractions first, and then find
the et CF of those fractions.
Similarly for LCM of decimals, convert
them to fractions and then find the LCM.
No rocket signs here,
just basic conversion.
Now for some quick ET C-F-L-C-M trics, a
simple trick for ET CF is that the et CF
of a set of numbers is always less than or
equal to the smallest number in the set.
Think about it, how can the biggest
common divider be bigger than the smallest
number itself, logically impossible.
Hena and for LCM, the LCM of a set of
numbers is always greater than or equal
to the largest number in the set because
the smallest common multiple must at
least be as big as the largest number.
It's a multiple of
common sense, my friend.
What about numbers Leaving a remainder
aha, the remainder vale problems to
find the greatest number which divides
X, Y, Z, leaving remainders A, B, C,
respectively, you simply find the XCF
of X minus A, Y minus B and Z minus C.
It's like removing the extra part first
and then finding the common divider.
And to find the least number, which
when divided by X, Y, z, leaves the same
remainder R. In each case it's LCM of
x comma y, comm, Z plus R. This is like
finding the common meeting point and then
adding that leftover bit simple, isn't it?
Just like adding butter chicken to
your normal biani methods of solving.
So how do we actually crack these
SCF and LCM calculations, my friend?
We have a few trusty methods
like your DEI, jugar.
First, the prime factorization method.
For ET CF, you express each number
as a product of its prime factors.
The ET.
CF is the product of the common prime
factors, each raced to the lowest power
it appears in any of the factorizations.
Think of it as finding
what's common and minimum.
For LCM, you again express each number
as a product of its prime factors.
The LCM is the product
of all prime factors.
Yes.
Common and uncommon ones.
Each raised to the highest power.
It appears in any of
the factorizations here.
We take everything and its highest avatar.
Next, the division method
or long division for ET CF.
This is like a friendly wrestling match.
You divide the larger number by the
smaller number, then you take the
remainder as the new device and the
previous device as the new dividend.
You keep doing this TAMAL
until the remainder is zero.
The last device, my friend, is your
ET CF for more than two numbers.
Find the ET CF of the first two,
then find the ET CF of that result,
and the third number and so on.
It's a chain reaction.
Then we have the common
division method for LCM.
This is like a group study method.
You arrange the given numbers in a row,
divide them by a common prime factor
that divides at least two of the numbers.
Write the quotient and the
undivided numbers in the row below.
Repeat this circus until no two
numbers have a common prime factor.
The LCM is the product of all devices
and the remaining undivided numbers.
It's like collecting all the
shareholders and their profits.
A quick one is the difference method
for et CF find the differences
between pairs of numbers.
The et CF of the original numbers
will be a factor of these differences.
In many cases, the et CF is simply
the et CF of these differences.
This often simplifies finding common
factors, making life a bit easier.
And finally the inspection method
for small numbers, my friend.
You can often find ET CF or LCM just
by eyeballing it or listing factors or
multiples until you find the right one.
This is less formal, but super quick.
For easy cases like finding
the ET CF of six and.
Three.
Right.
See, you are already an expert,
shortcuts and smart techniques.
Now for the Bollywood stylish shortcuts
and smart techniques, my friend,
for ET CF, if the numbers are prime
to each other, meaning no common
factors other than one, their et.
CF is simply one.
And if one number is a factor
of another, the smaller number
is automatically their SCF.
No need for complex
calculations, just deduction.
For LCM, if one number is a multiple of
another, the larger number is their LCM.
Simple logic, isn't it?
It's like saying if 10 is a multiple
of five, then 10 is also their LCM
Master of the house kind of thing.
Relatively prime numbers.
If the at CF of two numbers is one, they
are called relatively prime or co prime.
Their LCM in this special
case is simply their product.
Super useful, my friend.
For remainder problems, remember these
two for the smallest number, which when
divided by X, Y, Z, leaves same remainder.
R, the answer is LCM, X, Y plus
R, and for the largest number,
which divides X, Y, Z, leaving
same remainder R, the answer is et.
CF of X minus R, comma y minus R,
comma Z minus R. Simple subtraction.
Then at C, F. And the ultimate juga
trick for multiple choice questions.
Utilize options in multiple
choice questions my friend.
Always try checking the given
options, especially for LCM problems
to see which option is divisible
by all given numbers for ET CF.
Check which option
divides all given numbers.
Why calculate if the answer
is already staring at you?
Smart work over hard work, always
common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now let's talk about the pitfalls
where most friends make culty.
Don't be that friend.
Confusing.
HCF and LCM, this is
the number one mistake.
Often friends interchange the
definitions or calculation methods
leading to incorrect answers.
It's like confusing your
chai with your coffee.
Incomplete Prime factorization.
Failing to break down numbers completely
into their prime factors when using
the prime factorization method.
Half done work half correct answer.
Ignoring remainders in word problems
incorrectly applying at CF or LCM without
accounting for the given remainders.
The remainder is not just for
decoration, my friend, calculation
errors, simple arithmetic mistakes,
especially when dealing with
larger numbers or multiple steps.
Basic addition,
subtraction, multiplication.
Al can mess up the whole
problem, not identifying common
factors or multiples correctly.
Missing some common factors or
multiples when listing them out.
It's like forgetting a friend from your
WhatsApp group and finally applying
formulas blindly not understanding
the context of the problem and
applying an incorrect formula,
especially for problems involving
remainders or specific conditions.
Don't be a formula.
Parrot my friend, be a formula wise Owl.
WH framework summary.
All right, my friend.
Let's do a quick recap of the whole
film with our W framework summary.
Picture Abbie B style.
So what is it?
What is it?
HCF is the greatest common device.
LCM is the least common multiple.
Easy peasy.
Why do we need it?
It helps in grouping, dividing
and finding common occurrences
or smallest common points like
finding the perfect meetup spot.
When do we use it?
Applied when finding largest common
divisions, synchronizing events,
or distributing items Equally.
Imagine distributing met high, fairly.
Where is it used in scheduling,
resource allocation, measurement,
and solving numerical problems.
It's everywhere.
Like Jaap Supreme, who uses it?
Mathematicians, engineers,
planners, and anyone dealing with
numerical optimization or grouping.
Basically anyone who wants to be smart.
How is it calculated using prime
factorization division method or
inspection based on definitions.
We have all the weapons ready,
fully worked out examples.
Now let's get our hands dirty with
some live examples, my friend,
because seeing is believing, right?
Example one basic ET CF and
LCM calculation question.
Find the ET CF and LCM of 24, 36, and 40.
Options.
A at CF equals four LCM equals 360 B
at CF equals eight LCM equals one 20
C at CF equals 12 LCM equals seven 20
D at CF equals two LCM equals two 40.
Understand the question before
moving to explanation, step-by-step
solution with detailed explanation.
Step one, prime
factorization of each number.
24 is two multiplied by two, multiplied
by two multiplied by three, which is
two cubed times three, to the power of 1
36 is two multiplied by two, multiplied
by three, multiplied by three, which
is two squared times three squared, and
40 is two multiplied by two, multiplied
by two, multiplied by five or two
cubed times five to the power of one.
Step two, find ET CF to find the et.
CF.
Take the common prime factors
with the lowest power.
The only common prime factor here is two.
The lowest power of two is two
squared, which comes from 36.
So et CF equals two
squared, which is four.
Step three, find LCM to find.
The LCM take all prime factors,
both common and uncommon
with the highest power.
The highest power of two is
two cubed from 24 and 40.
The highest power of three
is three squared from 36.
The highest power of five is five
to the power of one from 40, so LCM
equals two cubed times three squared
times five to the power of one.
Which is eight times.
Nine times five.
That's 72 times five, giving
us 360, correct Answer.
A simple, isn't it?
Example, two word
problem, LCM application.
Question three.
Bells ring at intervals of 10,
15, and 20 minutes respectively.
If they all ring together at 10:00 AM at
what time will they next ring together?
Options a 10:30 AM B 10:45 AM C 11:00
AM D 11:15 AM Understand the question
before moving to explanation, step-by-step
solution with detailed explanation.
Step one, understand the problem.
The bells will ring together again at
a time that is a common multiple of
their individual ringing intervals to
find the next time they ring together,
my friend, we need to find the least
common multiple or LCM of 10, 15, and 20.
It's like finding their next
synchronized alarm clock moment.
Step two, find the LCM of 10, 15
and 20 using prime factorization.
Prime factors of 10 are two times five.
Prime factors of 15 are three times five,
and prime factors of 20 are two times,
two times five, or two squared times five.
So the LCM equals two squared times
three times five, which is four times.
Three times five, giving us 60.
This means the bells will ring
together every 60 minutes.
Step three, calculate
the next ringing time.
They last rank together at 10:00 AM They
will next ring together after 60 minutes.
Now 60 minutes is exactly one R right,
so 10:00 AM plus one r equals 11:00 AM.
Time for a tea break maybe.
Correct answer C. Easy
as making Maggie example.
Three.
Relationship between
ET CF and LCM question.
The ET.
C. F of two numbers is
12 and the LCM is 1 44.
If one of the numbers is 36,
what is the other number?
Options.
A 48 B 64 C. 70 2D 84 Understand the
question before moving to explanation.
Step-by-step solution
with detailed explanation.
Step one, recall the fundamental formula.
Remember our golden rule, my friend?
The product of two numbers is
equal to the product of the et.
C, F and LCM, so N one multiplied by
N two equals et CF multiplied by LCM.
Step two, identify the
given values here, ET.
CF is 12.
LCM is 1 44, 1 number and one is 36.
Let's call the other number
and two our mystery number.
Step three, substitute the
values into the formula.
So 36 multiplied by N two
equals 12 multiplied by 1 44.
Step four, solve for the unknown
number N two N two equals 1 44
multiplied by 12 divided by 36.
We can do some quick mathy
Jiggle Bundy here, right?
12 goes into 36, exactly.
Three times, right?
So 36 divided by 12 gives us three.
Now N two equals 1 44 divided
by three, and that gives us 48.
Correct answer a, isn't it?
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.